+++
date = '2024-12-09T12:36:58+05:30'
title = 'Growth Mindset'
+++

About a year back I started learning coding. Despite being in my twenties, which is quiet young. still I get the feeling when looking at the extremely talented teenage coders from China, that "am I really too old to learn coding ?". I struggled with this feeling for fairly long time but after reading few books on brain and psychology I learned the way of perceiving things. And from there only I learn the term "Growth Mindset.". So take it like this there are two types of mindset one is FIXED and other is Growth. 

So lets discuss, what is a mindset?, a mindset is a self perception or self theory. that people hold about themselves. Individuals often possess preconceived opinions or beliefs (based of experiences or someone told/gave feedback to them) that you are either - intelligent or unintelligent. This is a simple example of mindset. People may also have a mindset related their personal or professional lives—“I’m a good teacher” or “I’m a bad parent,” for example. People can be aware or unaware of their mindsets. The whole mindset thing has profound effect on - "Learning, achievement, skill development, skill acquisition, personal relationship, success, and a lot other dimensions of life."

In a fixed mindset, people believe their basic qualities, like intelligence or talent are simply fixed traits. They spend a lot of time in documenting these instead of developing them. And they also believe talent alone can create success, without any effort. Which is certainly not true. The students who believe and adopted fixed mindset knowingly or unknowingly that they are "smart" or "dumb", and there is no way to change this , may learn less than they could at slower rate, and because of this they get poor outcome which reinforces this FIXED mindset. When students with fixed mindsets fail at something, as they inevitably will, they tend to tell themselves they can’t or won’t be able to do it (“I just can’t learn Algebra”), or they make excuses to rationalize the failure (“I would have passed the test if I had had more time to study”).

On contrary, In growth mindset people believe most basic things can be developed through dedicated hard work, brains and talent are just the starting point. This view creates a love of learning and a resilience that is essential for great accomplishment. Persons who embrace growth mindsets—the belief that they can learn more or become smarter if they work hard and persevere—may learn more, learn it more quickly, and view challenges and failures as opportunities to improve their learning and skills.

So on a concluding note i just wanna say - Learning is something you can do at any age -- rather then focusing on others, just focus on yourself, and your personal rate of progress. Try and cultivate a "growth mindset" rather then a "fixed mindset" or in elite way we can say - Strive to nurture a growth mindset in lieu of perpetuating the shackles of a fixed mindset